# Discussion #57 — Replace or remove discriminator

- **Author:** @MikeRalphson
- **Category:** :bulb: Ideas
- **Created:** 2023-03-29 15:55Z
- **Updated:** 2024-09-11 14:00Z
- **Labels:** Data Modeling
- **URL:** https://github.com/OAI/sig-moonwalk/discussions/57

---

## Body

There are a number of issues with the current definition of `discriminator` (as well as a number of [open issues](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Adiscriminator)).

* It is not JSON Schema keyword-independent
* It claims to hint/short-circuit the evaluation of the `allOf`/`oneOf`/`anyOf` keywords
* It has an ill-defined short-hand notation for schema names, where the scoping rules are undefined
* It can only use schema names or `$ref`s not full sub-schemas
* Implementation ranges from patchy to non-existent

I think we can replace it with either JSON Schema `if`/`then`/`else` or a compact form such as:

```yaml
  switch:
    property: myType
    case:
      Cat:
        ... sub-schema
      Dog:
        ... sub-schema
      Lizard:
        ... sub-schema
```

---

## Comments (6)

### Comment 1 — @jdesrosiers · 2023-03-29 17:58Z

There's a new keyword called [`propertyDependencies`](https://github.com/json-schema-org/json-schema-spec/issues/1082) that's likely to land in the next release of JSON Schema that is intended to cover `discriminator` use cases while fixing a lot of its problems. I'd suggest removing `discriminator` because `propertyDependencies` should make it not necessary anymore. If `propertyDependencies` isn't sufficient, I suggest we work it out in JSON Schema so all JSON Schema can benefit rather than just OpenAPI users.


---

### Comment 2 — @ahl · 2023-06-01 14:15Z

Are there uses of the `discriminator` that **cannot** be modeled in JSON Schema (i.e. without the use of that field)? While it (maybe) affords the possibility of optimization, I haven't seen any implementations that are significantly more efficient than they would be using extant JSON Schema structures.

Further, I have found the description of `discriminator` confusing and complex. If the goal of this draft is simplicity, eliminating `discriminator` seems like a clear benefit with little to no down-side.


---

### Comment 3 — @sm-Fifteen · 2024-03-04 22:03Z

There was also a proposed keyword by @handrews way back in https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/issues/2143#issuecomment-727068862 that merely used a JSON pointer to designate which field to use as the discriminating field, without requiring some kind of duplication of the validation functionnality.

```js
{
  "selectBy": "0/class",
  "oneOf": [
    {
      "if": {"properties": {"class": {"const": "foo"}}},
      "then": {...}
    },
    {
      "if": {"properties": {"class": {"const": "bar"}}},
      "then": {...}
    },
    ...
}
```

I do realize that it's very late to bring this up given `propertyDependencies` has already been merged into JSON Schema and it would be a lot more practical for everyone to not add too much stuff on top of JSON Schema (on top of the syntax being less cumbersome than `if-then`), but I still figured it was worth bringing up.


---

### Comment 4 — @mikekistler · 2024-06-04 14:43Z

For the benefit of others reading this thread that aren't familiar with `propertyDependencies`, here's a link to the original proposal:

https://github.com/json-schema-org/json-schema-spec/issues/1082  (lots of discussion here)

and here is the PR that adds the keyword:

https://github.com/json-schema-org/json-schema-spec/pull/1143/files


---

### Comment 5 — @mikekistler · 2024-06-04 15:15Z

I think `propertyDependencies` is a good addition to JSON Schema, but I guess I'm not quite ready to completely abandon `discriminator` in OpenAPI. But I agree that it should be simplified and some of its problems fixed. Here's an idea that came to me while reviewing https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/3846 to clarify some details about `discriminator` in 3.1.x: ditch the "mapping" component and instead require each element of the `allOf` or `anyOf` to define its allowed values.

Here's an example:

```yaml
components:
  schemas:
    Pet:
      type: object
      discriminator: petType
      properties:
        name:
          type: string
      required:
      - name
      oneOf:
      - description: A representation of a cat
        type: object
        properties:
          petType:
            type: string
            const: "cat"
          huntingSkill:
            type: string
            description: The measured skill for hunting
            enum:
            - clueless
            - lazy
            - adventurous
            - aggressive
        required:
        - petType
        - huntingSkill
      - description: A representation of a dog
        type: object
        properties:
          petType:
            type: string
            const: "dog"
          packSize:
            type: integer
            format: int32
            description: the size of the pack the dog is from
            default: 0
            minimum: 0
        required:
        - petType
        - packSize
```

Note that each of the subschemas in the `oneOf` define the value(s) of `petType` that are allowed / map to that subschema.

The `discriminator` goes back to simply naming the property that will determine which variant to use. It is now purely a "hint" -- and normal JSON schema validators can simply ignore it since the schemas already contain the essential information.

I suppose this is not terribly different than `propertyDependencies`, but in my view it is simpler and only uses features of JSON schema that have been around for many versions / years, so should have good tooling support.

  - **↳ Reply 1 — @handrews · 2024-06-04 18:59Z**
  > This is essentially the `selectBy` proposal that was considered (but obviously not accepted) by JSON Schema quite a few years ago.  The main benefit I can see of this is that it would support non-string values.  But it would leave us in the business of extending JSON Schema again.

  - **↳ Reply 2 — @mikekistler · 2024-06-04 23:35Z**
  > But it would be a very small and completely compatible extension, and as I mentioned tools could safely ignore it as it is only a hint. If we chose to keep `discriminator` at all, I think this design maintains the spirit of the original keyword and addresses nearly all the issues of the current design.

  - **↳ Reply 3 — @handrews · 2024-06-05 00:21Z**
  > @mikekistler yes, if we decide to keep it at all I do prefer this version (`selectBy` was one of my proposals and I was always a bit sad it didn't get more traction - I can't remember if it was exactly the same, I probably made it a relative JSON Pointer or did something else to make it more complicated TBH).

  - **↳ Reply 4 — @sm-Fifteen · 2024-06-05 14:31Z**
  > @handrews: I haven't seen anything relating to `selectBy` since the comment I quoted in my previous post. I didn't know it had been officially considered and not accepted; I thought it ended up being just a throwaway suggestion that nobody else really noticed. Do you have a link to the discussions?

  - **↳ Reply 5 — @handrews · 2024-06-05 15:26Z**
  > @sm-Fifteen it was actually `selectWith` or `selector` and I lost that argument in favor of `if`/`then`/`else`.  I prefer not to look back at JSON Schema but you can probably dig it up if you really want to.

---

### Comment 6 — @mikekistler · 2024-09-11 14:00Z

One more point to raise here -- _if_ we keep the discriminator in some form in Moonwalk -- the 3.x specs say that the discriminator must be a `required` property, but this is overly restrictive. Allowing the _absence_ of the discriminator to "hint" at a particular variant should also be allowed and would better match the behavior in some language frameworks, such as .NET.
