# Discussion #104 — Is there a way to alias & deprecate a method to avoid a breaking change?

- **Author:** @rjaus
- **Category:** :pray: Q&A
- **Created:** 2021-10-27 20:40Z
- **Updated:** 2024-04-23 04:48Z
- **Labels:** Data Modeling, Organization & Metadata
- **URL:** https://github.com/OAI/sig-moonwalk/discussions/104

---

## Body

Hi,

Big fan of OpenAPI Spec.  At Xero we've moved to generating all our SDKs from an OpenAPI spec, and for the most part it's been incredibly successful!

One issue that has come up a few times is method renaming & deprecation

In a scenario that a method was incorrectly named during the initial release, or perhaps the endpoint has been renamed (less likely).  This results in the OAS spec requiring updating, which results in the method name changing in all of our SDKs, which results in a breaking change.

If we were manually building SDK's, I'd create this method as an alias, as to avoid an immediate breaking change.  Add in the release notes that the old method name will be deprecated in the next major version, add some warnings to on install (ruby / node) and then continue on.

In the next major release I'd remove the alias / old method & note the breaking change.

I presently have two of these changes blocked from release as they will be immediate breaking changes, && they will break across our SDK's. An example: https://github.com/XeroAPI/xero-ruby/issues/200

From researching this issue last time it came up, I couldn't find a solution in the OAS.  Keen to hear how others have resolved this? Or discuss how OAS could support this use case.

Thanks!

---

## Comments (2)

### Comment 1 — @reuvenharrison · 2022-08-17 08:39Z

Hi @rjaus,
I am @reuvenharrison, the creator of [oasdiff](https://github.com/Tufin/oasdiff), a diff tool for OpenAPI Specification 3.
I'd like to take advantage of your question above to discuss a related topic of non-breaking deprecations.

I recently added a solution for this use case based on a issue in oasdiff and I am looking for feedback.
Please see the original issue: https://github.com/Tufin/oasdiff/issues/116
And the solution: https://github.com/Tufin/oasdiff#non-breaking-removal-of-deprecated-resources

Related to your specific use-case, we could extend my solution by adding an ```x-replacement``` extension to indicate the new API that replaces the old one.

Ideally, I think this should be integrated into OpenAPI spec to support graceful deprecations.

Any feedback is welcome!


---

### Comment 2 — @handrews · 2024-04-19 17:28Z

@rjaus this seems to be tracked by issue #782.  It might also be relevant in Moonwalk (OAS 4), so I'm going to transfer the discussion over there and leave #782 here for potential 3.x work.

  - **↳ Reply 1 — @miqui · 2024-04-23 04:48Z**
  > @handrews Since both sunset (RFC 8594) and deprecation headers are available  it could be as simple as describing these headers for a resource in the API's openapi doc.